Today, we wrap up our series, Manifest.
And we have said that to manifest is both spiritual, religious, and societal phenomenon that tells us that if we can just imagine it, if we can wrap our minds around it, if we can declare it, then so it is.
And yet we know that manifestation comes with caveats.
It comes with some boundaries.
It comes with understanding that in this life we don't stand on our own.
That in this life we don't get here on our own.
And that in this life we don't do life on our own.
So when we're manifesting things, we have to keep in our minds and our hearts an idea of remembrance that we don't manifest on our own, but we manifest with and for the whole.
What do you mean?
This isn't just about what I want.
No.
What if this is about what God wants?
Hmm.
Let's go to the Old Testament prophet, the Old Testament book of Exodus, Exodus chapter 24, beginning in the ninth verse.
Hear these words.
Then Moses and Aaron,
Nadab and Abihu and 70 of the elders of Israel went up and they saw the God of Israel.
Under his feet, there was something like the pavement of sapphire stone, like the very heaven for clearness.
God did not lay his hand on the chief men of the Israelites.
They beheld God and they ate and drank.
The Lord said to Moses, come up to me on the mountain and wait there.
I will give you the tablets of stone with the law and the commandment, which I have written for their instruction.
So Moses set out with his assistant Joshua and Moses went up onto the mountain of God.
To the elders, he had said, wait here for us.
until we come back to you.
Look, Aaron and her are with you.
Whoever has a dispute may go to them.
Then Moses went up on the mountain and the cloud covered the mountain.
The glory of the Lord settled on Mount Sinai and the cloud covered it for six days.
On the seventh day he called to Moses out of the cloud.
Now the appearance of the glory of the Lord was like a devouring fire on the top of the mountain in the sight of the Israelites.
Moses entered the cloud and went up on the mountain.
Moses was on the mountain for 40 days and 49.
Please rise for the Gospel reading from the Gospel of Matthew chapter 17 verses one through nine.
I'm reading from the new revised standard version updated edition.
Six days later, Jesus took with him Peter and James and his brother John and led them up a high mountain by themselves.
And he was transfigured before them, and his face shone like the sun, and his clothes became bright as light.
Suddenly, there appeared to them Moses and Elijah talking with him.
Then Peter said to Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here.
If you wish, I will set up three tents here.
One for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.
While he was still speaking, suddenly a bright cloud overshadowed them and a voice from the cloud said, this is my son, the beloved, and with him I am well pleased.
Listen to him.
When the disciples heard this, they fell to the ground and were overcome by fear.
But Jesus came and touched them, saying, get up and do not be afraid.
And when they raised their eyes, they saw no one except Jesus himself alone.
As they were coming down the mountain, Jesus ordered them, tell no one about the vision until after the Son of Man has been raised from the dead.
This is the word of God for the people of God.
Thanks be to God.
Let us pray.
Lord, here we are to worship.
Here we are to bow down here.
We are to say that you are indeed your worthy and holy God.
So speak, Lord, for your servants are listening.
Speak, Lord, for your servants are hungry.
Speak, Lord, for your servants need a word from you.
had this your servant behind that old rugged cross so that everything that is said and everything that is heard comes straight from you.
In Jesus Christ's name we pray.
Amen.
You may be seated.
I think when I was in seminary, transfigurations and Amiah was the Sunday that I was most afraid to preach.
How do you explain to God's people that not once but twice somebody went up on the side of a mountain and the God who said that we are not allowed to see God's face showed God's self and there was glory?
Makes sense to you, right?
Yeah, that's how we felt in seminary too.
Not much feedback.
Everybody just stared off in the distance and said, well, I don't know how to explain that, but I'll try.
And year after year after year we celebrate Transfiguration Sunday and some years we pay really close attention and other years we pretty much ignore it but the pyramids are always white and the preacher always wears white and we say something about light and then we say we've done Transfiguration.
But year after year, we come back exactly the same as we were the year before.
Year after year, we're in the same seats, and we're doing the same things, and we're worried about the same thing.
And there isn't a whole lot of tangible change that we can see as a result of the transfiguration.
The people of God on the first transfiguration when Moses went up to the mountain, I don't think they were expecting much.
I think they just had gotten used to Moses talking to God and to talking to God on their behalf.
And they weren't super concerned about how that might affect them other than they might get an extra meal or they might go around the mountain one less time because maybe just maybe they had figured it out.
Maybe they had figured out the way out of exile.
Maybe they had figured out the way to peace.
Maybe they had figured out the way to joy.
Maybe they had figured out the way to resurrection.
Maybe they had figured this thing called life out.
But when Moses went up to the mountain, he brought elders with him, but they were not able to go the distance with him.
You see, you've got to understand that in this life, people will journey with you, but some of them will not be able to go the whole distance with you because they don't have the same kind of relationship with God that you have.
Everybody talking about heaven ain't going.
And we journey with folks and we journey with each other and we journey and journey and journey, but we're not all going the same place.
So Moses took the elders with him and they saw God.
The scripture says that they saw the God of Israel.
They saw the God they'd been hearing about.
They saw the God that Moses had been teaching them about.
They saw the God who had just been a cloud shepherding them through the wilderness.
And they saw this God.
And under God's feet was something like a pavement of sapphire stone like the very heaven for clearness.
When has everything last been clear in your life?
When have you said, Lord, just show me some clearness.
Show me a pathway forward.
Don't make sure that I don't step off the path, Lord.
Make sure that the path is so clear to me that I will know if I am one millimeter off.
But then the scripture says something strange.
It says that God did not lay his hand on these chief men, but they just stared at God and they ate and drank.
So many times God wants to lay a hand on us.
So many times God is at work in our presence, and we're missing it.
So many times God is trying to turn our lives upside down and we are holding on for dear life as if if we let go and take a breath that God will not care for us anymore that we might lose sight of God, but Miss Ruby God is not that fragile God is not fickle like humans
God doesn't have to be held on to so clearly that we might lose sight of God if we let go of the chokeholds we have.
But God also will not lay God's hand on us.
God will not bless us.
That's what that means.
God did not lay God's hand on them.
God did not bless them unless we are right with God, unless we are on the right path with God, unless we are seeking out for God.
God will not lay God's hand of blessing upon us unless we are righteous set right before God.
So many of us want to know what's going on in this nation, in this world, on this planet.
What is going on with natural disasters?
What is going on with violence?
What is going on in politics?
Why don't we care about anybody anymore?
As long as we live like this, there will be chaos.
And there will be those who say, I'm doing the best I can for God.
And yet God has not put God's hand on me.
And then the Lord said, come up to me on the mountain and wait there.
I will give you the tablets of stone.
These are the 10 commandments that they're talking about.
And I'll give you the 10 commandments of stone with the law and the commandment, which I have written for their instruction.
But Moses left the elders behind.
He said, wait for us.
Wait for us is just me and Joshua.
We're going to go up to this mountain and wait for us here until we come back to you.
And we're going to leave Erin and her here with you.
And if you have a problem, go to them.
What do we know about why Moses left the elders behind?
They were not ready.
Moses left the elders behind because they were not ready to experience God in all of God's glory.
They were not ready to receive what God wanted them to receive.
They were not prepared.
They were not ready.
They did not have their baskets ready to receive the overflowing that God wanted to pour out on them.
How do we know we're not ready?
That's not my job.
How do we know we're not ready to receive what God wants to give us?
We say things like, but such and such is supposed to do that.
We show up and we complain about what has and what has not been done.
We show up and we grumble about the way things used to be or we don't show up at all and we complain from a distance.
How do we know we're not ready?
Our spiritual baskets are not finished.
The nets are not molded together.
And so if God put something in our spiritual baskets, it would just fall through.
How do we know we're not ready?
We're looking to everything else but God to fix things for us.
Then Moses went upon the mountain and the cloud covered the mountain and the glory of the Lord settled on Mount Sinai and the cloud covered it for six days.
And on the seventh day he called to Moses out of the cloud.
Now the appearance of the glory of the Lord was like a devouring fire on the top of the mountain in the sight of the Israelites.
Moses entered the cloud.
and went up on the mountain.
Moses was on the mountain for 40 days and 40 nights.
Then when Jesus took Peter and James and his brother John and led them up to a high mountain, they went by themselves.
They didn't take everybody with them.
They went by themselves and Jesus was transfigured.
His face was lit up.
His clothing were lit up.
He shone brightly among them and suddenly there was Moses and Elijah and they were talking to Jesus.
And Peter, Simon Peter, Peter says, Lord, it is good for us to be here.
But if you wish, we'll set up some tents for you and your friends.
We have a tendency to want to put God in a container.
We have a tendency to want to package God into something that makes sense for us, that looks like us, something that we can handle, something that we can control, something that we can contain.
But the glory of the Lord is bigger than us.
It's brighter than us.
It's beyond us.
It's something that we don't know how to encounter until we are in the middle of it and until we are in the midst of it.
till we are ready for it.
You can get some tints ready or you can get ready for God.
You can package some things up and you can tell God how you want your box to look or you can stand and wait at the mountain and say, whenever you're ready, God, I'm ready to receive your glory.
Whatever you want me to have, God, I'm ready for it.
Whatever you want me to do,
God, I'm ready to do it wherever you want me to go.
God, I'm ready to go.
Lord, I'll get your tents ready.
But while Peter was still speaking, a bright cloud overshadowed them in a voice from the cloud said, this is my son, my beloved with him.
I am well pleased.
Listen to him.
And when the disciples heard this, they fell to the ground and were overcome by fear.
Because they had been taught that if they were allowed into the presence of the Lord, that was the end of their life.
They had been taught that if they saw God face to face that they would be struck down.
They had been taught that if they tried to encounter God on their own and for themselves that that would be the end of life as they knew it.
And so transformation here, transfiguration here is not just change.
It is a literal sea change.
It is a literal rolling upside down of the way that life has been.
It is a literal flipping inside out of the way that we have seen, the way that we have seen life.
It is a literal de-centering.
taking us off of our regular path to see that God is God all by God's self.
To see that what God has in store for us is beyond anything that we can ask, seek or imagine.
To see that the glory of the Lord is beyond anything we can contain.
Get up and do not be afraid.
When things aren't going your way, get up and do not be afraid.
When they say cancer, get up and do not be afraid.
When they say you don't have this job anymore, get up and do not be afraid.
When they say, well, she's always been like that.
She'll always be like that.
Don't touch her with a 10-foot pole.
Get up and do not be afraid.
When they say, A, get up and do not be afraid.
When they say, B, get up and do not be afraid.
Expect that God is with you.
Expect that God's glory is enough for this.
Expect that God has the final say.
Expect that God is.
Expect that God is at work.
Expect that God is paying attention.
Get up and do not be afraid.
The devil's whole job is to keep you scared.
The devil's whole job is to keep you afraid because in doing so the devil can block your blessing.
The devil can keep you from mending your basket so that God can pour out a blessing that you don't have room to receive.
Get up and do not be afraid.
Stop complaining, stop saying, stop doing the same whole thing.
Expect that God is moving in a new way.
There's an old saying that says there will be glory after this.
We're in the Olympics and we keep hearing about Olympic glory.
They're going to compete for Olympic glory and we have to understand that our glory doesn't have anything on God's glory, that God's glory is beyond what we can
There will be glory after this.
That is the promise of the transfiguration that what you see right now, what you left down at the bottom of the mountain is not what's gonna be at the top of the mountain.
When you woke up this morning, you expected one thing, but God had a plan for your life and a purpose for your life.
And it is a purpose that is filled with God's glory, but we have to get out of God's way
to experience God's glory.
There will be glory after this.
What is this?
Whatever is your barrier to getting to God?
For the elders with Moses, their this was that they really liked themselves and they really like to do what they like to do and they really like to eat and to drink and to be merry and to party.
Everybody has a this.
What is your this?
What is keeping you from experiencing the fullness of God in your life?
It may be your job.
It may be your family.
It may be a habit that you have.
It may be an unwillingness that you have.
Whatever your this is, you will not experience the glory of the Lord until this gets out of the way.
So how do we move this out of the way?
Moses, Jesus, Elijah, all of the greats that encountered God, they weren't just sitting there waiting on God.
Did you hear that?
They weren't just sitting there waiting on God to come and wipe things fresh and clean and new and start over and make everything perfect.
They were working.
They were working on God's behalf to create a world, an earth, a place where people could experience the fullness of God.
Don't think we can experience glory if it's not about God.
Don't think we can experience abundant life if we're working against what God wants for our lives.
Don't think we're going to experience this change, this transfiguration until we go to work for the Lord.
Pastor, why is this not working out?
Well, what did the Lord say?
Is that where you're supposed to be?
Is that what we're supposed to be doing?
How does this help us love God and love others?
Everybody wants glory, but will we do the work?
We want the after this.
But preacher, we don't want to get to the after.
See, Moses had put in the work.
Moses and Joshua went up to the mountain and put in the work.
They had the relationship with God.
They were trying to teach the people how to come along.
The elders didn't quite get it.
And the others didn't quite get it because when Moses comes down off the mountain, the people have made an idol.
And they're worshiping a cow instead of the Most High God because they wanted their own glory instead of God's glory.
So what's it going to be?
Do we live for our own glory?
Do we live for our own name?
Do we live for our own celebration?
Or do we live for God?
There will be glory after this.
Will you be there?
Jesus said get up and don't be afraid.
That's what we have to manifest in this life is moving beyond fear in the name of Jesus.
to get to God's glory.
How do we do that?
We have to put the work in.
Keep overcoming fear.
When you are afraid to take the next step that God has told you to take, just push your foot out a little bit.
And eventually once you put your foot out, you would have taken a step.
And then you'll be a little bit more comfortable taking another step and another step and another step.
And then all of a sudden we're walking in faith and not by sight.
We're walking by what God says and not by what society is telling us.
We are walking in expectation and not in fear.
And expectation changes everything.
Expectation changes our attitudes.
Expectation changes our outcomes.
And expectation changes our outlook.
Have you ever woken up in the morning and just say, oh, I don't have anything to do today.
I'm just going to lay here.
They call that bed rot.
Bed rot.
Because we have no aim.
We have no get up and go.
No purpose.
Have you noticed the difference when you wake up and you know that you know that it's going to be a good day and that your steps are directed and you're going to have some meaningful breath in this day?
You feel like a totally different human.
Stop with the rot.
Live into purpose.
Live into God's glory.
Live into God's transfiguration.
Don't just expect change.
Live change.
You can be like the Israelites when Moses came down the mountain and they were lost and in so much trouble.
Or you can learn from Jesus and get up.
Do not be afraid and walk into the glory of the coming of the Lord.
In the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, we pray.
Amen.